# 10 New Year's resolutions for designers

Mike Monteiro
3 Jan 2012

http://m.netmagazine.com/features/10-new-year-s-resolutions-designers

Get the new year off to a positive start with these design resolutions

Wake up. I hope you enjoyed your holiday because it's a new year and
it's time to get back to work. We did pretty good last year. We started
standing up for ourselves. We stopped working for free. We started
getting our financial house in order.  (Please don't make me do the
[contract thing](http://vimeo.com/22053820) again this year.) We
rediscovered typography (again). We learned to think about mobile first.
We learned how to make responsive sites. And we stopped comping with
lorem ipsum and started paying attention to the actual stuff we were
designing for.

This year? This year's gonna be a goddamned golden age.

Last year we trained. This year we fight.

## 1. Choose better problems to solve

Designers are, by definition, problem-solvers. And the world has never
been so blessedly full of problems. Our infrastructure is rotting, the
economy is crap, Wall Street is awash with criminals and millions of
people can't get basic medical care, food and water. We don't need
another app to rate your sandwich. We don't need to know when we go to
sleep and get up. We do not need digital farms. We need real ones. We
need fresh water. We need solutions for the apocalypse.

We have more processing power, affordable tools, and combined
intelligence right this very minute than at any point in the history of
design. We are using it to build shit. It's time to aim higher. Let's
find problems to solve that actually improve people's lives. Whether
it's figuring out a better way to access medical records, figuring out
how 14 year olds can stop carrying forty pounds of textbooks back and
forth to school every day, or a reservation system for the communal
rooftop farm in your building, there has got to be something more
beneficial to society than the next Facebook clone.

## 2. Stop stealing crap

Don't get me wrong. I'm not against stealing.  I'm against the quality
of junk you're stealing.  Design is the collective knowledge of all the
design that has been done before. So take advantage of how others have
solved a particular problem. Learn from what they did and see if you can
take it to the next evolutionary step.

Do I mean that you should literally steal their code or drop their
screenshots into your own work? No. I'm telling you to be aware of and
take advantage of the learning that came before you. Be aware of
yourself in that timeline. And become the person who next generations
will steal from.

Don't be afraid to steal, just steal the right stuff. I am old enough
that my first book on how to make websites was called View Source. If we
saw something cool, we viewed the source. We copied it. We tried doing
it ourselves. Then we added something new to that, put it online, and
somebody came along and copied that.

You have not been alive that long. Design has been with us since the
creation of the universe. Be aware of it, explore it, take from it and
put something new into the timeline once in a while for someone else to
steal. Trying to re-solve a problem that has been solved by millions of
other designers without the awareness of what they did isn't just a sin
of ignorance; it's a sin of ego.

## 3. Stop trying to save bad work

The most common question I get from designers after pointing out what is
wrong with their work is, "Can I save this?"

You are not Jesus and comps aren't for saving. If something isn't
working, start over. Otherwise the goal you're working towards is saving
your work, not solving the problem.

Also, comps do not have feelings. You are not abandoning them.  (You
have no idea how much therapy that sentence took.  Seriously.)

This urge comes from not wanting to feel like the time they've spent on
that comp is wasted. The only possible way you can waste time is by
being dishonest with yourself about its value. If you just spent an hour
on a comp thinking it was working, then that was time spent honestly
trying to solve a problem. The minute you realise the comp isn't working
and you start trying to "save it", you're no longer working towards good
design. You're working towards ego salvage. You gonna bill for that?
That's what I mean by dishonest time.

## 4. Stop being your own obstacle

I spent the first 10 years of my career saying things like, "If I could
just do this work the way I know it should be done…" and convincing
myself that someone else was keeping me from making better choices. I'll
often be reviewing work with another designer and they'll say, "Well, if
I were doing this..." I stare back at them in astonishment until they
realise what they've said.  What is this strange gene that makes
designers handicap themselves?

Stop designing the compromises you expect to have to make. Your fear of
being wrong wins out over your fear of having to convince someone you're
right. Your client is in your head with you.  Telling you to make the
photo smaller, the logo bigger, paginating the multi-page article.
You're choosing the typeface you think your client will like, not the
one that solves the problem best.

How horrible for a client to have gone out and found a good designer and
then get handed work that looks like something they would have done.
Clients deserve your best work, not their best work. Really good
clients, the ones I want you to work with, would rather be challenged
than pandered to.

Always design the best choices. Compromises will always come later on
down the road. With much argument. And after much salesmanship. But if
you're coming to the table with a compromise in hand, even before you've
tried selling your best work, you'll end up losing the client's respect
– which you were so naively craving anyway.

You can't design in fear. Don't throw the fight before a punch gets
thrown.

## 5. Blame yourself first

Blow a deadline? Miss a requirement? It happens. Raise your hand. Let
everyone know it's your fault. The sooner you take responsibility for
something the sooner you can start fixing it.  Excuses help no one.
Everyone respects the person who can admit their mistakes. No one
respects the weasel trying to pin the blame on their teammates.

This year, everything will be your fault. It'll feel good.

## 6. Stay curious

Don't be the designer who gets proficient and then stops.  It's easy to
make a steady living doing that one thing you're really good at. Until
something comes along and obliterates it. Aim higher. Remember those
guys who were really good at Debabelizer? (Ask your parents.) Don't
spend your career satisfied with doing things you're good at – try to do
things you're not good at. You'll eventually be good at more things, and
you'll know what you honestly suck at. And you'll have a longer career.

There's a ton of great shit coming down the pike this year, including
stuff that's gonna surprise us. Not to mention the stuff we're still
getting used to from last year.  The future's not only fun, it's messy.
Welcome it with open arms.

## 7. Learn to make mistakes faster

The first thing I do when I sit down with a designer is sneak a peek at
the file name. If it's 2pm and we're looking at "acme_article_1.psd",
I know we're in trouble. By 2pm we should be looking at double digit
version numbers. If we're not, then chances are the designer's being too
precious and careful. They're either not willing to make mistakes or not
recognising them fast enough. Even if you think you've nailed it on the
first try (you haven't, by the way), challenge yourself to try it
another way. You'll learn more by trying something 50 different ways
than by stubbornly trying to make your first idea work.

## 8. Stop Using Your Mom as an Example of a Stupid Person

How many times have you heard, "We need to make this so easy my mom
could use it!"? The goal is worthwhile. The example is condescending.

Do you think Chelsea Clinton asks herself if her mom would understand
something complex? No. Because her mom is a badass. And while your own
mom may not be the Secretary of State, she was smart enough to raise
kids who learned to read, navigate the internet and become career
professionals. She's no dummy. So please stop using her as an example of
one. (Not to mention that we're using a beloved family member to thinly
veil an industry-wide sexism problem.)

Stop using "mom" as a shortcut for finding out who the people you're
actually designing for are. Find out how the people you're designing for
actually run their lives and handle their business. Good design comes
from empathy, not stereotyping.

And send your mom flowers. She'll know what to do with them.

## 9. Learn to write

Ninety percent of design is communication. Half of that will be done in
writing. A designer who can't write can't defend their work. And work
that can't be defended will die.

I've seen a lot of good work get trampled on because the designer
released it into the wild without a clear explanation of how it mapped
to strategies and goals, a defense of how it met project requirements,
and a well-articulated advocacy from its designer. The biggest lie
you've all been fed is that good design sells itself. Whoever told you
that couldn't write.

## 10. Get comfortable arguing

Remember when I said half the communication you'd be doing would be in
writing? Well, here's the other half.  You're going to spend a lot of
time this year (Mayan apocalypse notwithstanding) presenting your work
to people. They will ask you questions about your work. Questions it's
your job to know how to answer. At some point they may ask you to make
changes to the work that you feel are detrimental. You'll stand your
ground. You'll be amazed how many times people are just looking for
a solid justification. Stop giving away the farm just because someone
asked for clarification. Just calmly tell them why you think your
solution is right. You're the line of defense for design. It's your job
to protect good design. No one else's. Sometimes you'll win, sometimes
you'll lose. But you will always do your job.

Above all, remember that you have more power over situations you find
yourself in than you've been giving yourself credit for.  Start using
it.

Enjoy your year, it's going to be pretty awesome.

