The Rockstar Myth
Andrew Wilkinson
9 March 2011

http://blog.metalabdesign.com/post/3757812079/the-rockstar-myth

We have to accept that we aren't super-human. Too many designers pride
themselves on hand-crafting everything they produce. They write their
own code and insist on designing every screen of a project themselves.
Designers like this burn themselves out within a matter of years. When
your business grows, your time invariably gets split between doing the
work you love and keeping up with email, sending invoices and estimates,
banking, updating the books, and all the other minutiae that goes along
with running a business.

When I started MetaLab in 2006, the idea of handing anything off seemed
insane. Hiring somebody terrified me. It seemed like a risky expense to
take on. Since then, the company has grown to 20 people. Hiring them has
been the best business decision I've ever made. It's freed me up to
build incredible products, let me focus on the stuff that I love, and
given me the opportunity to work on projects that would have been
impossible without the help of a great team. Being a one-man-band is
great at first, but it's unsustainable. Perfection is impossible. If you
focus on design, your coding will slip. If you focus on coding, you'll
get behind on email. You can't wear ten hats, and you can't be
everything to every client - you need to focus on what you love most and
let others pick up the slack.

When you're a one-man-band, your income is tied to your daily output. In
concept, this is great - you reap what you sow. In reality, you get
burnt out and hit speed bumps. You break up with your girlfriend. You go
on vacation. Shit happens, and when it does, your financial stability
invariably takes a hit. When you have a team, you share the load. When
you get overwhelmed or need to refocus, you can have someone else take
the reigns for a while instead of having a nervous breakdown.

When you're a one-man-band, you have to do things you hate. You became
a designer because you love designing things, not reconciling bank
statements. Fortunately, there are people out there who love reconciling
bank statements. Hire one, even just part-time. You get to keep doing
what you love, gain back a ton of the billable time that you would have
spent fudging the numbers, and help someone else out in the process.

When you're a one-man-band, you can't handle big clients. Nike isn't
going to sit around while you personally hand-code every screen.
American Airlines isn't going to wait a week for revisions. To land
serious projects, you need to focus your energy where it's most valuable
and let others pick up what you can’t handle.

Running your own company is supposed to be about doing what you love on
your own time. That's what's so great about being an entrepreneur: you
get to decide what your day looks like, what projects you take on, and
when and where you work. So why do so many of us get trapped into
miserable 10-hour days? I've watched tons of designers burn out one
after another, many of them giving up on running their own business
altogether and going to work for someone else.

I've been there, but since I learned to delegate and got over my fear of
hiring, things have changed. I usually get to the office at 2pm, take
weekends off, and work 4-6 hour days. It's not that I'm lazy - I love
what I do - just that I have the freedom to focus on exactly what I want
to work on at any given moment. If I feel like taking on some coding,
that's what I do. If I want to write copy, I write some. I still get to
put my stamp on all of our projects, it's just that I kick off the first
couple designs, then move on and let my team handle the follow through.

Of course, handing things off is hard when you're a perfectionist. You
have to hire well, and more importantly, let people put out their own
fires. When I started hiring contractors to help with my workload,
I made a critical mistake: If their first mockup wasn't great, or
a client got unhappy, I'd immediately step in and put out the fire. You
need to let things blow up in people's faces. Let them make mistakes. If
one of your employees misses a deadline, force them to talk to the
client directly. If you're the middle-man jumping into the fray whenever
anything goes amiss, you'll be stuck micro-managing everyone. Step back
and let people clean up their own messes and they’ll make the necessary
course corrections on their own. Your team will respect you for it, and
you'll save yourself tons of headaches.

Hiring has been my saving grace. The company did over a million dollars
in revenue this year. We've built two great web-apps and launched all
sorts of great side projects. We all work short days, manage our own
schedules, and get to work with incredible clients. None of this would
have been possible if I was a one-man-band "rock star."

This article originally appeared in the March 2011 issue of .NET
Magazine
