# Keep your crises small

Ed Catmull  
31 January 2007  

http://fearlesscoder.blogspot.com/2010/02/ed-catmull-pixar-keep-your-crises-small.html  
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k2h2lvhzMDc

Well, I have a fun job. But I'm not going to talk about the fun parts. I'm
going to talk about the problems that we've had - about the hard parts. 

I want to start with two questions. The first question is "Why do successful
companies fail?". Now, I grew up around this whole industry of computers, and -
as it went through this remarkable revolution - and saw a lot of companies come
and go. But there were two that stand out in my mind. 

One was Evans & Sutherland, which is located in Salt Lake. This was one of
pioneering companies in computer graphics, and they had the lead. They had more
knowledge and expertise than anybody else. And they were in the best position
to take that knowledge and go to the next level as a company. But they made
some decisions in which they lost that lead. And a new company leapt to the
front and that was Silicon Graphics, founded by Jim Clark who incidentally used
to work for Evans & Sutherland. And SGI had this remarkable run. They built the
graphics machines that was used throughout the world for a variety of
visualization graphics techniques. A lot of software was built on it. The
revolution in computer graphics in the entertainment industry was build on
their machines. They had everything. But they made two serious mistakes. And
the things about these serious mistakes was, there were several people on the
outside that took a look at that and say "That's a really bad idea. You
shouldn't do that". Nevertheless, they did it, and they lost the lead. They
lost the lead to NVidia. Incidentally, made up of former SGI employees. And
they did some remarkable things. And they, with ATI, are still out in the lead.

But the company that had that lead was SGI and all the knowledge. Now, the
people had said they're making the wrong decision. In some ways, they're like
Cassandra, where you're telling the truth, but the people don't listen. And
Cassandra was cursed with being able to see the future, but not having people
believe her. And it felt like that kind of situation here. 

The reason I start with this question was, at that time, while all this is
going on, I'm with this struggling company, and we're trying to figure out how
to make things work. And we start off with a company. It's just hard. And it
was pretty - a very difficult task. But I'm thinking, "If we're ever
successful, how do I keep from falling into the trap that these companies are
falling into. And it's not like they blindsided by something which catches them
totally off-guard. This stuff is really pretty obvious. They're missing the
obvious. 

The second question relates to a dinner that I had with a studio executive -
the head of a studio - a couple years ago. And he said at that - actually, it
was a lunch - he said at that lunch, "Our central problem is not finding good
people. It's finding good ideas."

So that was an interesting expression. So as I gave talks for the next while
after that, I would pose that question to the audience and ask them whether or
not they agreed with him. And what I found was that, in every case, the
audience was split 50/50. It's really pretty astonishing. Didn't matter whether
they were students, experienced business executives, artists, high school
teachers - they all split. Some thought it was right; half thought it was
wrong. 

Well, let me come back to that second question later. So now, let me step into
the store, which is, in '91, when our company was about five years old and went
through the various hells you go through when you're starting a company. We
finally got our chance, and we entered into a relationship with Disney to make
the first computer-animated film, "Toy Story". And at that time, we got a few
things right. We did have a culture where the artists and the technical people
were peers with each other. They socialized with each other. They each thought
the other was world class. The compensation structure was the same. They were
allowed to intermarry [laughter]. If there are problems - and there were always
problems - people felt comfortable about coming in and expressing their
problems. You couldn't fix every problem, but it's important to hear them.

The other thing we had was something which we called the "Brain Trust." We had
a certain group of people who were very remarkable at telling stories. And part
of being remarkable was, not only that they were funny and focused and good at
storytelling, but they had complete trust in each other. And they were very
often - what you might call "brutally honest" - except for them, they didn't
think of it as "brutally honest." They thought of it as "necessarily honest,"
and it was always taken that way. It was never a matter of ego or putting
somebody down. It was always about the story. And therefore, you could say
something hard, and it was taken in the right spirit. And given that kind of
camaraderie in the key group of people, it is just gold. And it's an amazing
group. And to this day, it's an amazing group of people. So we got that right.

We had a review process that was actually a combination of some things that
Jonda learned from Disney, along with things that were at ILM at Lucas Film.
But it was unique because of that combination. But what it amounted to was
that, in the process of making the film, we reviewed the material every day.
Now, this is counterintuitive for a lot of people.

Most people - if you can imagine this - you can't draw very well, but even if
you can draw very well, suppose you come in, and you've got to put together
animation or drawings and show it to a famous, world-class animator. Well, you
don't want to show something which is weak or poor. So you want to hold off
until you get it to be right. And the trick is, actually, to stop that
behavior. We show it every day when it's incomplete. If everybody does it every
day, then you get over the embarrassment. And when you get over the
embarrassment, you're more creative. And that's - as I say - it's not obvious
to people, but starting down that path helped everything that we did. Show it
in its incomplete form. There's another advantage to doing that, and that is,
when you're done, you're done. Now, that might seem silly, except that a lot of
people - they work on something. And they want to hold it, and they want to
show it, let's say, two weeks later to get done - only, it's never "right". So
they're not done. So you need to go through this iterative process. And the
trick was to do it more frequently to change the dynamics. 

Also, as we started up in making this film, we brought in a new group of
people, because we had artists, we had technical people, but we never made a
movie before. So we didn't have a group of people who were really production
managers. They were the ones keeping track of things, making sure that the
material went from place to place. You got, literally, millions of things that
are going on. There's a lot to manage, a lot to take care of. So you needed
people who thought that way and were experienced with it. So this new group
coming in from Los Angeles. So, we finish the film, and the film was a big
success. It went way beyond what anybody thought. It was a great start to this
new field of computer animation. And we were building company. We went public
at that time. We went public one week after the film opened. And it was the
biggest IPO of the year, I think. And we wanted people to see our product
before they invested. And it just went well; it was a great, whirling event. 

But at that time, or just prior to going public, we had to start on the next
film. Because you can't just have one product, and that's it. You've got to
keep coming out with them. And we're very aware there's a "second-product
syndrome"  where you kind of overdo it in the second one, and you blow it. So,
we got somebody working on the second one. And as the team started to roll off
the Toy Story, we began to put them on the new film, which is White Sock. And
so, then we met with the artists and said, "This is great. Let's move on to the
next film." And we met with the technical people, and they said, "Great, we're
ready for it." And we met with the production managers. They said, "What?! We
don't like it here. We want to quit." So, we undercovered this major problem.
They felt like they were second-class citizens - felt like people treated them
second class. So I went around and asked people, among the artists and the
technical people. And sure enough, they thought the production managers were
second class [laughter]. It's all true. They thought they were , that they were
getting in the way of getting the job done. So we had this major disaster. 

So the first question is "What was the problem?". And then, I want to come back
to the deeper thing for me. Making a movie is a very organized activity. And
so, what was happening is, because it's so organized and there is so much stuff
going on, you can easily lose control of it. That we had this very hierarchical
structure in place. And the carious people there wanted to make sure that all
the information went through the proper channels. Because it went up the
hierarchy and down the hierarchy, so that everything happened in the right
place. And that whole notion of controlling that information flow pissed
everybody off. And yet there was this feeling you had to maintain control. The
key concept - we realized at that time - was that we  had confused the
organizational structure with the communication structure, a very common thing
that happens in a lot of companies. They are different. Yes, you must be
organized; things must happen in order. You can lose control. But communication
needs to be able to happen between anybody in the company at any time. It
really is, you know, it's peer to peer, right? It's the notion you can go to
anybody else. Yes, let your managers know if you have to go anywhere. An
open-door policy frequently means you can go to the head of the company. But
open-door policy, to us, means anybody can go to anybody any time. Very
important. And once we actually broke that down, things changed dramatically.

The other part of that, though - and this is the harder thing for people to
realize - and that is that for managers the one thing you hate as a manager is
to be surprised. So you don't like to walk into a meeting and find out
something for the first time in your meeting. In fact, it's kind of a sign of
disrespect if you weren't told before the other people in the meeting. And if
you've got everybody thinking that way, you got a problem. So one of the tricks
for a manager to learn is, you don't need to be the first person to learn.
Don't get upset. Get over it. It actually doesn't matter. The fact that
somebody else talked about the problem ahead of time is a good thing - not a
sign of disrespect. OK. 

So the other question, which was the difficult one for me was "Why had I missed
this problem?" We're off making this film, I was having a good time and I'm not
looking for it. I thought I had a great relationship, open door and everything
like that. Totally missed it. Well, part of the reason was that there was a
group of new people that came into an existing structure. They accepted it.
They were used to reporting to producers. And if you didn't like it, well,
you're only on the job for four months, you just put up with it and you'd move
on. So there was no reason for them to complain. Just put up with it. The other
problem though, was that they really did like the fact that they were working
on a groundbreaking film. It was very exciting to be making history. They loved
that. They loved working for John Lasseter. So I realized that, because they
loved a lot of things, they were willing to put up with stuff that they didn't
like. And this is one of the fundamental problems, I think, with companies. And
that is that "success hides problems." It happens to a lot of us in our
personal lives with our health. When we're healthy, there may be a lot of
things that are bad for us, but our health lets us get away with doing stuff
that's bad for us. Then years later, the logic of that time doesn't hold up,
but we do that. It happens with a lot of companies. It happens with state,
local, and national governments. When you're healthy, you've got the resources,
you don't need to address the problems. And when I look at a lot of the
companies - I look at SGI, and so forth - they were actually very healthy, and
they're very strong. And the problems were there, but they didn't have to look
at them at that time, because they lucked at success. And they were successful
at that time. 

They let that get in the way of diving deep and finding the problems. So even
though I was kind of aware of this problem, I'd been caught by it too. So just
being aware of it wasn't enough. So the next stage for us, while we're making
Bugs Life is, we started to make a sequel to Toy Story. Now, the logic,
initially, which came from Disney was, if you have a successful film, you need
to have follow-on things to keep the characters alive. At that time it was to
make direct, video sequels. So we picked a couple of animators to give them a
chance to direct this picture, put together a team, started to make this film.
Well, right away, we ran into a problem. And that was that one group was making
a direct video sequel, which was essentially like B or C level of expectation
and quality. 

And the other team - the A team - was working on A Bug's Life, where you've got
the very best people and the expectation is, "We have to match Toy Story."
Well, this wasn't good, we realized. You've got two different standards of
quality under the same roof? We realized, "This actually isn't good for our
souls to do that." We shouldn't be thinking that it's OK to be doing something
which isn't great. So fairly early on, we actually stopped that. We decided to
make Toy Story a theatrical release. So, we decided that, OK, we've got to go
for the A quality. Now, incidentally, when you make a film - when you start to
make it - it isn't very good. When you put the reels together and you get the
story, if it's really good, you're almost done, right? But when you're
starting, you're not almost done. So you've got to go through a lot of steps to
get there. And what you want to see is every six months or three months,
whenever you do a reel, you want to see a step forward. And sometimes you make
a step back, but in general, you want to take that step forward. what we found
was, this was sort of hovering around not being very good. And just lots of
issues weren't right and the directors didn't get along and the producers were
having problems and that wasn't very functional team. So I went to John, who's
focused on Bug's Life, and said, "Well, we got a problem here." He said,"Don't
worry. Trust the process. It'll get to be better." No, it wasn't getting any
better.

So, in 1998, A Bug's Life is finished. And there was a worldwide tour, and John
went on that tour. But he knew that, when he returned, that he then had to
address the issue of Toy Story 2.

Now, Toy Story 2, as he returned, had to be delivered in nine months, all
right. So it was already a tight schedule for all they were. So he came back.
He watched Toy Story 1 before he came in to work from this trip to Europe, came
in to watch the reels. He walked in and said, "You're right. We've got a major
problem." So basically, we took the A team - we put them on the project. We
went down to Disney and said, "The film isn't good enough. We have to throw it
away and start all over again." And the answer was, "Well, actually, it's
better than you think. We think it is good enough, but more importantly, it's
too late. You literally do not have the time between now and then to deliver it
to redo this film." So we said, "It's not good enough, and we know we don't
have enough time, but we're going to do it anyway." So we came back. John told
the story crew to take a good rest over the holidays and come back on January
second. We were reboarding the movie. So we then started - we now had eight
months left. 

We then started this incredibly intense effort to get this movie out. It was
boarded quickly. It was pitched to the company. It was an electrifying pitch.
We had a lot of overachieving people working for overachieving managers to get
the movie out - worked brutal hours with this. When I say "brutal", we had a
number of people that were injured with RSI. One of them permanently left the
field. 

We had, actually, a married couple that worked there - and this was in June, so
it's summer. And the farther was supposed to drop the baby off ad daycare, but
forgot - don't know why. But he came and left the baby in the car and came into
work. and given, you know, as the heat was rising, the mother asked about - and
they realized - they rushed out, and the baby was unconscious.

The right thing was then, they out the ice water on the baby. And the baby
ended up being fine in the end, but it was one of those traumatic things like
"Why did this happen?" Are we working too hard? So when I say it's "intense," I
mean it really was intense. So but the film was finished on time, and it was a
huge success. Many people think that it was better than the first one. But we
learned several things from that.

One, I should say on the activity of working so hard, we adopted new ways to
the way we work in terms of the RSI. We hired a full-time ergonimist and a dock
nurse coming in twice a week. A masseuse is available all the time. We limit
the number of hours that people can work. There's a whole number of things that
we instituted and really got people to take this seriously. A pilates and yoga
classes, soccer - everything - just to keep people physically fit. They realize
they're in for the long haul. The reason I say this, though is cause it's kind
of a side note, but it turns out that this program costs money, which of
course, we're going to do anyway, but what we found after we did this was that
the injury rate dropped dramatically. The insurance company lowered our
premiums and the reduction of premiums more than aid for the entire cost of the
program. I say that because some people say they can't afford this kind of
stuff. And I think the answer is they can be affordable and should be. 

On the issue of the film itself, it wasn't working. But what was it that wasn't
working? Because it turns out, the theme of the story was actually the same. It
was a toy that gets stolen by the Toy Collector, and ultimately, has to make
this choice. It wasn't working as a movie. And the reason was that the movie's
coming out from Pixar and Disney, so you know that Woody's going to end up with
his original family. If yo know what the end is before you start, you don't
have a movie. So you need to have people believe that he has a real choice to
make. And so, when they came back and reboarded it, that's when they add
Jessie's Song, who talked about her growing up and she was the darling of this
little girl, but the little girl grew up and moved on. And that's really what
happens. And that was her message to Woody. She says, "Yes, you may like the
situation you were in, but life goes on. It changes. You can't hang on to
that." And that's something that's true, right? We all know that. And because
of that, we can relate to why there's a hard decision that has to be made. And
so, the things that are put in the movie are to get it so that it relates to
decisions that we all have seen or we can appreciate and that we can therefore
enjoy as a movie. And that's what turns it into a real movie instead of just
some cheap follow-on. So, I come back to the first question: "Which is more
important?" The, "What's the central problem?" - finding good ideas or finding
good people? And the answer is very clear: the idea was the same. If you have a
good idea and you give it to mediocre group, they'll screw it up. If you give a
mediocre idea to a good group, they'll fix it, or they'll throw it away and
come up with something else. 

The other thing to note is, there is a confusion, I think, that the people have
and is - the books and press kind of work this way in that we think about "an
idea." When we think of ideas for movies, we think about ideas for products.
and it's usually thought of the some singular thing. But the reality is, there
successful movies - as with all successful products - have got thousands of
ideas. It's just all sorts of things necessary to make it be successful. And
you have to get most of them right to do it. And that's why you need a team
that works well together. 

Now, we had a development department at the time, and our development
department was structures just as it was with other studios. That is, it's a
group of people looking for ideas to make into movies.  And as we went through
this, we realized, "We're thinking about it in the wrong way." The goal of
development is not to find good ideas. It's to put together teams of people
that function well together. And that change just altered the way we thought
about making movies. And to this day, this development department is loved by
the directors, because it's a support group. It's not somebody telling them
what to do. It's not a gate. It's a support group. the directors - because
we're a director-driven studio - are the ones who are responsible for the movie
and everything else is to support them. On the way, we measure progress. It's
how well that team gets together. Because initially, the films they put
together - they're mess. It's like everything else in life. The first time you
do it, it's a mess. And sometimes it's labeled, "well, the first time it's a
failure," but it's not even the right word to use, right? It's just like you
get the first one out, you'll learn from it. And the only failure is, if you
don't learn from it - if you don't progress. So the way we measure it is like,
"Is this team functioning well together?" and it's the thing that's never let
us down. 

When that team functions well, they will succeed. When things are going wrong,
they will fail. 

So for me, Toy Story 2 was the defining moment for the studio. Our third movie
was our defining moment. It set the way we think about things and still do. You
know, around this time, we were successful - a lot of people were jumping on
the bandwagon. One of the unfortunate consequences is that 2D animation in this
country was actually shut down. They thought the audience lost the taste for
2D, and they just wanted 3D. It was all nonsense. It has nothing to do with the
technology. It had to do with the story.

But, unfortunately, people like to copy the wrong things. Now, people do copy
things. And it's bizarrest thing, because copying, in some ways, is a form of
learning. So you say, "Well, I'll learn from what everybody else did. And then,
I'll copy that." But, in many respects, it's shallow. It's sort of like, if you
think about movies, you know, sometimes you see people do a remake of a movie.
But you notice, they always remake good movies. And rarely do they beat the
good movies. But the fact is, there are thousands of movies out there that are
actually "great idea," but they're poorly executed. They should be remaking bad
movies. Or does it happen with product? 

The ones that do better aren't those that just copy somebody else's good
product. They actually take the thing that's going wrong and fix that. All
right. That's the better idea. So anyway, what we found was, all of a sudden,
everybody is trying to copy what we're doing. You know, they could copy the
technology, but they couldn't copy the process we were using to come up with
the story. Now, even though - we have this great Brain Trust, though, and a lot
of experience and learned all this, things didn't get any easier. We kind of
hoped, at some point, you'd get under your belt, and it gets easier, but it
didn't get easier. 

So we instituted a process in doing postmortems after every movie, trying to do
a deep analysis. The first postmortems were very successful. We worked very
hard to make sure people were safe - they  didn't get shot for pointing out
problems. And everybody got a lot out of them. They valued them greatly. So
we're off to a good start. But then, as you go on to the next postmortem,
people began to game the system. And it turns out, people know the value - they
know they should do them - but they don't like to do it. So why don't they like
to do the postmortems. Why don't they like to do the analysis. Well, they're
kind of tired of working on something for three years. They don't want to think
about it anymore. Some people are defensive. Some people feel that one of the
things they want to do in these meetings is make their team feel good. "Look
what we did!" So it's not really an in-depth analysis. And for us then, the
task is to keep pushing this, because unless we do the in-depth analysis, we
will always go for the easy thing. Because again, it's when you're successful
and the film goes off right, you kind of like to stop at that point - you sort
of bask in it and not dive deeper. 

So what we found is, we have to change the way we do the postmortems every
single film. Because the next film, they'll game it. But if we can change it in
the right way, then it will work. So, the latest thing we're doing until it
gets gamed is, we're asking them to pick, from their process, the five things
that they would do again and the five things they wouldn't do again. We try to
get both to get the balance. What we're really interested in are the things
that they  wouldn't do again. but you try to get both out there. And the other
- and this is a fairly important one - is to get a lot of facts about the
process. When you put the facts up, and you factor it in, it actually
stimulates discussion. And it's those discussions which are very valuable. You
come out of that - we have a new theory about how to do things. And we would
get it - so we'd come up with a new way of doing it. And we'd get that every
time about two-thirds right and one third wrong. And you never know what the
mix is going to be, but roughly, it's like, one-third of the stuff you try to
do is just bogus, because you called it wrong, but that's OK. At least you got
two-thirds right. 

So let me summarize a few of the things we've learned. On is the constant
review. The second is, it must be safe for people to tell the truth. Third is
that communication should not mirror the organizational hierarchy. People and
how they function is more important than ideas. And do not let success mask
problems. Do a deep assessment. Now, having said those things, because it's a
part of the culture of Pixar. And well, there's another problem. So let me set
this up by discussing another discovery. Early on, we came to believe that the
story is the most important thing in our process - it led our decision-making
process. 

and so, as we had a lot of different polls, we'd come back to his driving
principle, "It's the story that counts." And we thought this is one of the
things that made us successful was this realization. And now so, having said
that and we would say that and we would tell people about it.

And we made all the sacrifices for it. And then, I discovered - as I was
listening around - that  studio says the same thing. Everybody says "The
story's the most important thing," even if the story was drivel. It might be
true - in fact, it is true - but it doesn't affect behavior. Now, when I say
"story is the most important thing," I think the analogy is probably "quality
is the most important thing." It's one of those things that's true and you
agree it's true and you say it. That doesn't mean anything. Now, when I first
started Pixar, I came from a pure technical background - I had to learn a lot
about business quickly. And I hadn't gone to business school, so I just read a
lot of books. And there were a few bits and pieces, but I got to say for the
most part, I didn't get a lot of traction with them. Tried a variety of things.
So I said, "Well, maybe the problem is, I got to get to the essence of them."
So there's this service that gets the summaries in business books. So I tried
that, and I read those. That was actually an amazing experience, because in
reading the essence of the books, I realize they were content-free[laughter].
So I thought, "Well, what's going on here? Is it the fact that the book doesn't
have any content?" - which is probably true in many cases - or, another thing
is - "Is it that you can't take some of these things and reduce them in a
meaningful way?" - which I suspect is also true. I ran into a similar thing.
This just happened a while ago. It's similar to "the story is most important
thing." It comes right out of the world of architecture. And at that time, we
were looking at building a building. Actually, it was just this last year. And
I know there's some buildings down there which are abysmal. They're just awful
buildings. And so, I started talking with our building person up at Pixar as
we're coordinating to get this built, he explained to me the concept in
architecture, "designing from the inside out" as opposed to "from the outside
in." And "outside in" is the bad one that you get the look of the building, and
sort of that dictates what you're doing. You end with poor buildings. And
"inside out" is where you think about the functions, where people work, and
that sort of dictates things, and you try to make it look good from the
outside. So, in that world, "inside out" is good, and "outside in" is  bad. So,
then I met with an architect who was responsible for one of the buildings. And
he used the phrase, "If you design the buildings from the "inside out," but the
building he designed was a disaster. So I realize, "Oh, it's the same thing."
The phrases important in this community - it just doesn't have any effect on
behavior. So once - and the principle is - once one can articulate an important
idea into a concise statement, then one can use the statement and not have to
have the fear of changing behavior. And I just see this over and over again. So
it's like, I can summarize some of these things, but the real issue is, "What
do we do?" Not even what we say about it, what are the things that we do? Every
product that we're making has got to be original, which implies that we can
never repeat ourselves. 

Now, this is - to me, it's an important thing - because a lot of people in
Hollywood don't understand that. If something is successful - if you've got
Star Wars or Shrek or whatever, then basically, "Let's do that again," right?
We'll try to do the same thing again. But you can't think that way with any
products. Everything is new and original. And therefore, our way of dealing
with and solving the problems has got to be an original. So the secret is, we
have to keep on digging deeper and deeper and knowing that we're always missing
something that's important. So let me return to the first question. Why do
successful companies fail? For that matter, why did Golden Age is end? I do
believe that organizations - human organizations - are inherently unstable.
They will fall over, and you have to work to keep them upright. But they fall
slowly. Most people don't notice it. They let their success blind them. They
don't see it's falling over. The falling takes place slow, but the collapse is
quick. You have to do constant assessment. You have to look for the hard
truths. Mentioned Cassandra before - it's the Greek myth. And again, she's
cursed with seeing the truth, but nobody will believe her. I don't think the
Greeks had it right, actually. I think the curse is on the people that don't
listen, right? We have to be the ones who are looking for it all the time. And
when we hear things evaluate it, "Is it right?" I think in the movies - in our
process - we have various crises, but there are two fundamental kinds of
crises. One is that you don't like what you see. So you have to make changes.
Now, the fact that you make changes is not in and of itself a crisis. That's
just hard work. What makes it crisis is that there are a lot of people with
vested interests and with positions. And you've got to actually rearrange
things, and it's people butting up against each other. And that's a hard thing
to do. It's an emotional thing to do. But you do that, and you end up making a
better film. The second kind of crisis is, you release the film, and the
audience doesn't like it. Now, at that point, it's too late to do anything
about it. But the difference between the two crises is that the first one is
self-imposed. And that's the important part. 

Now - and in this talk, I've focused on our problems, and the tone might be a
little downbeat on some of this, but I haven't talked about the fun part. but
this approach in thinking about it always diving deeper and questioning, has
led us to assemble the best people in the industry.

It's the most extraordinary team I've worked with. We are in this extraordinary
building up at Pixar that it's one of the greatest places to work. we have a
lot of fun together and a lot of laughter. and our job is to keep it going.
Thank you.

Q&A:

Q: You mentioned that Silicon Graphics made some crucial mistakes, what were
they?

A: In my opinion was, they bought Cray Computer, all right? The second one was,
they came out with an add-in PC board, and it was not successful. They reached
the conclusion that it was not a good idea, all right? Rather than saying, "The
first one is not successful, what should we do to make it successful?" Because
that, basically, is the way the whole industry is structured now. And it's not
taking the information they learned from that first failure, if you will, and
turning it into a success. 

Q: How do you document this? And how do you make sure that this knowledge that
you're gaining is actually turning in to something practical? Was there
somebody documenting this and writing down the process to work on, or how would
you do it?  A: Honestly, in all of our meetings - whether creative or
postmortem - we have notetackers. And they're staff members, but they're really
good. They just keep track of everything. The second thing is that the people -
in preparing for it - actually get a lot of information. It's the people in
charge who go through the process and, thinking through it, get a lot of their
information. And the people who are then presented to are frequently the
leaders of a follow-on film. So there's a direct hand-off in communication. And
just having the discussion surfaces a lot of issues. So there's a variety of
things. Excuses why they don't do it are frequently like, "Well, I've already
started the next process, so it's too late. The postmortem happens too late for
me." So there are things like that, which get in the way, in addition to people
not wanting to do it. So for me, it's saying, "Okay, we all know it's good, but
it's like your medicine, you know? You've got to do it. Or actually, like your
vitamins - it's something you take. You need to do it." 

Q: You talked about collecting facts, so how effective or ineffective [inaudible]

A: The process of gathering the evidence is mixed. That is, we're fairly good
at it. And we're getting better at it, but there are a number of times you
haven't kept track of the detail. In general, when we actually gather the facts
and we present it, then the reaction of most people is like they're just
fascinated by it. Because they're flying by their gut, which is pretty good,
but there are things they missed that the facts show. And people don't let
facts override judgment, but it actually is - it sometimes gives you pictures
you can't see otherwise. So it's very well-appreciated at Pixar. And we've got
- in fact, there's a graduate from Stanford University, Alori Organi, who's
brilliant. And he was extremely good at taking facts and teasing out important
information. And you present that information in really concise ways, and just
- it's things that people didn't see before. So the fact they see that means
they want to participate, and it helps them commit to gathering facts in the
future. So it's a very successful way of working. 

Q: So second question that you raised, finding good people vs. good ideas. I
think they kind of go hand in hand. So have you really reached the conclusion
that they really should go together as opposed to one vs. the other? 

A: Where do the ideas come from? The reason of phrasing it that way - because
you essentially need the new and the fresh ideas - is, what you're doing is
giving credit and camaraderie to the team of people. You can't give that to an
idea. And what you're trying to do is, have the people work well together. So
I'd much rather say, "The people are the important thing, and they're going to
come up with the ideas." If I say, "The ideas are the important thing." It's
like, "Okay, what do you want to come up with?" You know, you have to support
them. So that's why I do put the people first, because the ideas are a process
that result from people working together. I mean, the result of people working
well together.

Q: Two quick things. First, is there any way to share the Pixar process with
[inaudible]? The second thing is, how do you track audience? How do you segment
and track audience interests, and is that something that changed and evolved
over time as you're doing these films?  A: Well, on the first question - oh,
God, I wish - no actually, I do believe there is a notion of self-assessment,
which is unfortunately lacking. I think one of the things, if I look at the
left and the right, fundamentally, they actually don't trust people. The thing
I like about the center is that it's more based on trust, not that mistakes
aren't made. When I look at the extremes, it's like, "We're going to impose
something," and it's not a trusting mechanism. And I think the notion of
self-assessment is apolitical. It doesn't matter whether Republican or
Democrat. Some people sort of get the notion of "honest assessment," and some
people don't, because they've got an agenda - you know - and we all know that.
And we see the results. And we talk about - so when the golden age is in, even
at the national level. Are we guaranteed that America will be great in 200
years? There are no guarantees. We have no guarantees any company will be
around. You know, all of it requires constant diligence in the thought process,
which is to say, we have responsibility to make them better. As far as heading
for an audience, we don't target a group -  in particular, we don't go after
kids, all right. It's a bad idea to target films for little kids. Two reasons.
One is, it essentially is talking down to them. And if you talk down to them,
they don't like it that much. And for adults, it's very boring. The truth is,
children live in an adult world, and they're used to hearing things they don't
understand. So our approach is, we want to make movies that we enjoy. There's a
physical humor and physical comedy that comes from acting from animation that
kids do enjoy. So there's a thing that they do like. And obviously, we don't
put in things into our movies that would offend families or their children. But
we write the dialogue and the story for us. We want them to be meaningful to
us. And that's how we think about it. We will do some late screenings after the
story is fairly well-along. Partly because, if you've seen a movie over and
over again, you actually lose perspective on it. So sometimes you just need
that somebody who's never seen it before and you just sit there in the room.
and it sort of open your eyes. You don't even record anything. You just see
things that are just different. And that's more of the way that the feedback
works.  

Q: [inaudible] evolution company writerband to a service system. It looks like a brilliant move now, but I'm wondering ten years ago, was it - when you try to transform a company and the culture, was it as obvious a decision as it turned to be?

A: Well, when we formed a company, we spun off from Lucas Films. And initially,
we sold a hardware product, which is an image computer. And that was rough.
That's my reading all the books. And I called Jim Clark, the head of Sun -
Scott Bernelli - for advice. And it turns out that well-meaning advice, but it
turns out, it was the wrong advice, because it wasn't appropriate for what we
were doing. I didn't know enough to start of figure some of this out. And we
were - it was hard - and we got into the software business. We then did the
RenderMan software, and we started doing commercials. But I got to tell you, we
kept losing money. It didn't matter what we did. The one nice thing was, is
that, our investor was Steve Jobs. And now mind you, in one sense Steve is -
he's not known for being patient - but the reality is that he was patient with
us. He was funding our education. And so, by the time they got the chance for
the big one, which was the movie, we'd been through a lot. We had bonded
together as a team.  And he funded that education, but then it came back in
spades, because we worked together with him as a team to build this rather
remarkable place. And it was really cool, really, to have an investor sort of
understood what we were doing and what we were going for, which really helped
change the industry. So, we moved over into filmmaking. So we're actually not
in service anymore, except for, we do still sell RenderMan. So it's just really
nice business. It's - almost all the special effects you see in movies are
using software that we sell. It's the only piece of software that we do sell.
We don't sell any of our other animation software, because we think there's a
certain advantage we have. but in this case, we like the fact that there's an
industrywide standard. 

Q: [inaudible] Successful process of telling stories, that back then you worked
with animated actors instead of real, live actors. And where do you see the
industry heading? 

A: Well, when we make films. The question is animated actors vs. "live action"
actors. The characters in our films are really a combination of the writers
from the story team putting it together, the design, and the animators from the
physical acting and the voice of the actor. Since we pick and select actors,
we've got really remarkable voice. It's really that collection that creates a
character. And it's just this part of the animations, which is different than
live action. The time scale is different; the way that it's put together is
different. And in both "live action" and "animation," you can also do it badly
and you can do it well. It just depends upon talent. 

Q: The Pixar was a Lucas spin-off and obviously there have been other very
successful Lucas spin-offs like PhotoShop and DigitalDomain and Telltale and
others. What is it about Lucas veterans that makes them successful
entrepreneurs? And do you see the same characteristics in Disney entrepreneurs?

A: Well, the - George Lucas was really remarkable in that, having produced Star
Wars, he believed that bringing technology into the industry would benefit it.
And so, the job that I was given when I came in to Lucas Films in 1979, was to
bring high-technology into the industry. So then, digital audio, video-editing,
computer graphics and games. So nobody else was funding it in this industry
except for George. So I was able to go out and hire the best people in each one
of these areas. So that was a great activity to be engaged with. Now, in the
end, it's a filmmaking company. And we sort of like this hotbed of ideas and
good people. So there's some spin-out from that. So this was a computer
division. Within ILM, they didn't actually spin out other companies. It was
actually people who - it's because they were  successful that some people were
stolen away to start competing companies. But it wasn't as if an island had
spun them out. And in the case of PhotoShop, the original one was written by
John Knolls, who is the Knolls brothers, one of whom is still there and is a
sub-tech for making films, a rather remarkable one. But it was early sold off
to Adobe. And it's big changes actually been through Adobe. But part of it is,
there's something about the environment - where you've got technology and art
together - that's a great mix. It's a nice place to be. And if you think about
it - and mostly we've all thought about this - because they think of films like
the old fashion. But when Walt Disney started off back in the '30s with this,
it was a technological revolution. Films were new, color was new, sound was
new. He was the first one to put sound in there. He was the first one to put
color. He locked up Technicolor for awhile. So there were a lot of things. He
was adopting every technology as it came along. And that mix of the technology
on the artist provided - or made this environment where a lot of cool things
were happening. And you look back in the past, and you sort of focus on the art
without realizing, "What was the environment that made that?" And then, over a
while, that environment sort of went away. And then, the new environment
basically picked up at Lucas Film, and then at Pixar, where there's the mix of
the artist and the technical together. And now, realizing that and seeing what
had happened then and what happened now, it's very important for us to keep the
technology changing. Keep it mixed up. Sometimes the individuals don't always
see that, when they look at it from their point of view, but you have to look
at it as a whole ecosystem and having that mixture together. Sort of like what
a university is supposed to be, right? A lot of things happening in one place
to stimulate you to think about things in new and innovative ways. All right,
good. 

Q: Could you have successfully managed Pixar without your technical background
to the success that it is today? 

A: Well, I don't know. I always look at Pixar as really having the combination
of a variety of people there. I brought one way of looking at things. John
brought something. Steve Jobs brought something. And there are various other
people who brought something to the mix. And it was the balance. And there are
things that could have gone wrong in that, and then, that wouldn't have
happened. But you know - and none of us even point and say any of us did it
alone. It really took all of us together to do that. So, I can't separate out
my background and say, "Well, what would I have done different?" I am who I am,
and each one of those is different in a complementary way. We're very different
from each other, but that difference is our strength.   

Q: The naive sort of assessment of selling RenderMan is that you're enabling
your competition. Can you explain kind of how you look at that internally and
why you continue to believe that that's the right strategy for the company, and
why it helps to raise the level of excellence at Pixar? 

A: Well, with any piece of software like that, it requires a great deal of work
to keep it in good place. And we have a lot of things going on. There are
certain things that we actually invented in the first place, but now, we buy
commercially. When we made the first paint program, the first composited,
right? But, in fact, we don't do them. We do them as commercial products. It is
to our advantage to have an industrywide standard. If we didn't sell it, there
would be another one. And then it would be a pain in the neck, because we would
be different than the rest of the studio in something that needs to be "across
the studio" and now "across two studios." So in that case, we're better off
having an industrywide standard. For me, the technology is part of the culture.
It is a - we have some competitive advantage in several of the things we do
with technology, but I do think that the biggest competitive advantage is the
way we work - we have the technology and the creative work together. The things
that have been talked about is actually the thing that, is somebody hears it,
they'll probably copy the wrong piece of it. So like, I can tell them what's
important. It won't matter, you know? They'll just say, "Oh, I understand that.
The story is the most important thing." And that, in fact, is interesting. If
somebody else figures it out, then they'll make good stories. We're also in a
funny industry where the competitors are competitors for the weeks that you're
out, and the rest of the year, you actually want them to do well. If people go
to movies and have a bad experience - a competitor's movie, have a bad
experience - then that sort of takes away their enjoyment from going to the
movies. If they have a lot of bad experiences, they won't go to movies. If they
go and have a great time, then they'll want to go more. So we want our
competitors to do well, except when our movie's out. Then they can burn and
die. [laughter] Thank you.
