# Solitude and Leadership

<a rel='author'
href='http://theamericanscholar.org/solitude-and-leadership/'>William
Deresiewicz</a>, October 2009

_The lecture below was delivered to the plebe class at the United States
Military Academy at West Point in October 2009._

My title must seem like a contradiction. What can solitude have to do with
leadership? Solitude means being alone, and leadership necessitates the
presence of others—the people you’re leading. When we think about leadership in
American history we are likely to think of Washington, at the head of an army,
or Lincoln, at the head of a nation, or King, at the head of a movement—people
with multitudes behind them, looking to them for direction. And when we think
of solitude, we are apt to think of Thoreau, a man alone in the woods, keeping
a journal and communing with nature in silence.

_Leadership_ is what you are here to learn—the qualities of character and mind
that will make you fit to command a platoon, and beyond that, perhaps, a
company, a battalion, or, if you leave the military, a corporation, a
foundation, a department of government. _Solitude_ is what you have the least
of here, especially as plebes. You don’t even have privacy, the opportunity
simply to be physically alone, never mind solitude, the ability to be alone
with your thoughts. And yet I submit to you that solitude is one of the most
important necessities of true leadership. This lecture will be an attempt to
explain why.

We need to begin by talking about what leadership really means. I just spent 10
years teaching at another institution that, like West Point, liked to talk a
lot about leadership, Yale University. A school that some of you might have
gone to had you not come here, that some of your friends might be going to. And
if not Yale, then Harvard, Stanford, MIT, and so forth. These institutions,
like West Point, also see their role as the training of leaders, constantly
encourage their students, like West Point, to regard themselves as leaders
among their peers and future leaders of society. Indeed, when we look around at
the American elite, the people in charge of government, business, academia, and
all our other major institutions—senators, judges, CEOs, college presidents,
and so forth—we find that they come overwhelmingly either from the Ivy League
and its peer institutions or from the service academies, especially West Point.

So I began to wonder, as I taught at Yale, what leadership really consists of.
My students, like you, were energetic, accomplished, smart, and often
ferociously ambitious, but was that enough to make them leaders? Most of them,
as much as I liked and even admired them, certainly didn’t seem to me like 
leaders. Does being a leader, I wondered, just mean being accomplished, being
successful? Does getting straight As make you a leader? I didn’t think so.
Great heart surgeons or great novelists or great shortstops may be terrific at
what they do, but that doesn’t mean they’re leaders. Leadership and aptitude,
leadership and achievement, leadership and even ex­cellence have to be
different things, otherwise the concept of leadership has no meaning. And it
seemed to me that that had to be especially true of the kind of excellence I
saw in the students around me.

See, things have changed since I went to college in the ’80s. Everything has
gotten much more intense. You have to do much more now to get into a top school
like Yale or West Point, and you have to start a lot earlier. We didn’t begin
thinking about college until we were juniors, and maybe we each did a couple of
extracurriculars. But I know what it’s like for you guys now. It’s an endless
series of hoops that you have to jump through, starting from way back, maybe as
early as junior high school. Classes, standardized tests, extracurriculars in
school, extracurriculars outside of school. Test prep courses, admissions
coaches, private tutors. I sat on the Yale College admissions committee a
couple of years ago. The first thing the admissions officer would do when
presenting a case to the rest of the committee was read what they call the
“brag” in admissions lingo, the list of the student’s extracurriculars. Well,
it turned out that a student who had six or seven extracurriculars was already
in trouble. Because the students who got in—in addition to perfect grades and
top scores—usually had 10 or 12.

So what I saw around me were great kids who had been trained to be world-class
hoop jumpers. Any goal you set them, they could achieve. Any test you gave
them, they could pass with flying colors. They were, as one of them put it
herself, “excellent sheep.” I had no doubt that they would continue to jump
through hoops and ace tests and go on to Harvard Business School, or Michigan
Law School, or Johns Hopkins Medical School, or Goldman Sachs, or McKinsey
consulting, or whatever. And this approach would indeed take them far in life.
They would come back for their 25th reunion as a partner at White & Case, or an
attending physician at Mass General, or an assistant secretary in the
Department of State.

That is exactly what places like Yale mean when they talk about training
leaders. Educating people who make a big name for themselves in the world,
people with impressive titles, people the university can brag about. People who
make it to the top. People who can climb the greasy pole of whatever hierarchy
they decide to attach themselves to.

But I think there’s something desperately wrong, and even dangerous, about that
idea. To explain why, I want to spend a few minutes talking about a novel that
many of you may have read, _Heart of Darkness_. If you haven’t read it, you’ve
probably seen _Apocalypse Now_, which is based on it. Marlow in the novel
becomes Captain Willard, played by Martin Sheen. Kurtz in the novel becomes
Colonel Kurtz, played by Marlon Brando. But the novel isn’t about Vietnam; it’s
about colonialism in the Belgian Congo three generations before Vietnam.
Marlow, not a military officer but a merchant marine, a civilian ship’s
captain, is sent by the company that’s running the country under charter from
the Belgian crown to sail deep upriver, up the Congo River, to retrieve a
manager who’s ensconced himself in the jungle and gone rogue, just like Colonel
Kurtz does in the movie.

Now everyone knows that the novel is about imperialism and colonialism and race
relations and the darkness that lies in the human heart, but it became clear to
me at a certain point, as I taught the novel, that it is also about
bureaucracy—what I called, a minute ago, hierarchy. The Company, after all, is
just that: a company, with rules and procedures and ranks and people in power
and people scrambling for power, just like any other bureaucracy. Just like a
big law firm or a governmental department or, for that matter, a university.
Just like—and here’s why I’m telling you all this—just like the bureaucracy you
are about to join. The word _bureaucracy_ tends to have negative connotations,
but I say this in no way as a criticism, merely a description, that the U.S.
Army is a bureaucracy and one of the largest and most famously bureaucratic
bureaucracies in the world. After all, it was the Army that gave us, among
other things, the indispensable bureaucratic acronym “snafu”: “situation
normal: all fucked up”—or “all fouled up” in the cleaned-up version. That comes
from the U.S. Army in World War II.

You need to know that when you get your commission, you’ll be joining a
bureaucracy, and however long you stay in the Army, you’ll be operating within
a bureaucracy. As different as the armed forces are in so many ways from every
other institution in society, in that respect they are the same. And so you
need to know how bureaucracies operate, what kind of behavior—what kind of
character—they reward, and what kind they punish.

So, back to the novel. Marlow proceeds upriver by stages, just like Captain
Willard does in the movie. First he gets to the Outer Station. Kurtz is at the
Inner Station. In between is the Central Station, where Marlow spends the most
time, and where we get our best look at bureaucracy in action and the kind of
people who succeed in it. This is Marlow’s description of the manager of the
Central Station, the big boss:

> He was commonplace in complexion, in features, in manners, and in voice. He
> was of middle size and of ordinary build. His eyes, of the usual blue, were
> perhaps remarkably cold… . Otherwise there was only an indefinable, faint
> expression of his lips, something stealthy—a smile—not a smile—I remember it,
> but I can’t explain… . He was a common trader, from his youth up employed in
> these parts—nothing more. He was obeyed, yet he inspired neither love nor
> fear, nor even respect. He inspired uneasiness. That was it! Uneasiness. Not
> a definite mistrust—just uneasiness—nothing more. You have no idea how
> effective such a … a … faculty can be. He had no genius for organizing, for
> initiative, or for order even… . He had no learning, and no intelligence. His
> position had come to him—why? … He originated nothing, he could keep the
> routine going—that’s all. But he was great. He was great by this little thing
> that it was impossible to tell what could control such a man. He never gave
> that secret away. Perhaps there was nothing within him. Such a suspicion made
> one pause.

Note the adjectives: _commonplace_, _ordinary_, _usual_, _common_. There is
nothing distinguished about this person. About the 10th time I read that
passage, I realized it was a perfect description of the kind of person who
tends to prosper in the bureaucratic environment. And the only reason I did is
because it suddenly struck me that it was a perfect description of the head of
the bureaucracy that _I_ was part of, the chairman of my academic
department—who had that exact same smile, like a shark, and that exact same
ability to make you uneasy, like you were doing something wrong, only she
wasn’t ever going to tell you what. Like the manager—and I’m sorry to say this,
but like so many people you will meet as you negotiate the bureaucracy of the
Army or for that matter of whatever institution you end up giving your talents
to after the Army, whether it’s Microsoft or the World Bank or whatever—the
head of my department had no genius for organizing or initiative or even order,
no particular learning or intelligence, no distinguishing characteristics at
all. Just the ability to keep the routine going, and beyond that, as Marlow
says, her position had come to her—why?

That’s really the great mystery about bureaucracies. Why is it so often that
the best people are stuck in the middle and the people who are running
things—the leaders—are the mediocrities? Because excellence isn’t usually what
gets you up the greasy pole. What gets you up is a talent for maneuvering.
Kissing up to the people above you, kicking down to the people below you.
Pleasing your teachers, pleasing your superiors, picking a powerful mentor and
riding his coattails until it’s time to stab him in the back. Jumping through
hoops. Getting along by going along. Being whatever other people want you to
be, so that it finally comes to seem that, like the manager of the Central
Station, you have nothing inside you at all. Not taking stupid risks like
trying to change how things are done or question why they’re done. Just keeping
the routine going.

I tell you this to forewarn you, because I promise you that you will meet these
people and you will find yourself in environments where what is rewarded above
all is conformity. I tell you so you can decide to be a different kind of
leader. And I tell you for one other reason. As I thought about these things
and put all these pieces together—the kind of students I had, the kind of
leadership they were being trained for, the kind of leaders I saw in my own
institution—I realized that this is a national problem. We have a crisis of
leadership in this country, in every institution. Not just in government. Look
at what happened to American corporations in recent decades, as all the old
dinosaurs like General Motors or TWA or U.S. Steel fell apart. Look at what
happened to Wall Street in just the last couple of years.

Finally—and I know I’m on sensitive ground here—look at what happened during
the first four years of the Iraq War. We were stuck. It wasn’t the fault of the
enlisted ranks or the noncoms or the junior officers. It was the fault of the
senior leadership, whether military or civilian or both. We weren’t just not
winning, we weren’t even changing direction.

We have a crisis of leadership in America because our overwhelming power and
wealth, earned under earlier generations of leaders, made us complacent, and
for too long we have been training leaders who only know how to keep the
routine going. Who can answer questions, but don’t know how to ask them. Who
can fulfill goals, but don’t know how to set them. Who think about _how_ to get
things done, but not whether they’re worth doing in the first place. What we
have now are the greatest technocrats the world has ever seen, people who have
been trained to be incredibly good at one specific thing, but who have no
interest in anything beyond their area of exper­tise. What we _don’t_ have are
leaders.

What we don’t have, in other words, are _thinkers_. People who can think for
themselves. People who can formulate a new direction: for the country, for a
corporation or a college, for the Army—a new way of doing things, a new way of
looking at things. People, in other words, with _vision_.

Now some people would say, great. Tell this to the kids at Yale, but why bother
telling it to the ones at West Point? Most people, when they think of this
institution, assume that it’s the last place anyone would want to talk about
thinking creatively or cultivating independence of mind. It’s the Army, after
all. It’s no accident that the word _regiment_ is the root of the word
_regimentation_. Surely you who have come here must be the ultimate
conformists. Must be people who have bought in to the way things are and have
no interest in changing it. Are not the kind of young people who think about
the world, who ponder the big issues, who question authority. If you were, you
would have gone to Amherst or Pomona. You’re at West Point to be told what to
do and how to think.

But you know that’s not true. I know it, too; otherwise I would never have been
invited to talk to you, and I’m even more convinced of it now that I’ve spent a
few days on campus. To quote Colonel Scott Krawczyk, your course director, in a
lecture he gave last year to English 102:

> From the very earliest days of this country, the model for our officers,
> which was built on the model of the citizenry and reflective of democratic
> ideals, was to be different. They were to be possessed of a democratic spirit
> marked by independent judgment, the freedom to measure action and to express
> disagreement, and the crucial responsibility never to tolerate tyranny.

All the more so now. Anyone who’s been paying attention for the last few years
understands that the changing nature of warfare means that officers, including
junior officers, are required more than ever to be able to think independently,
creatively, flexibly. To deploy a whole range of skills in a fluid and complex
situation. Lieutenant colonels who are essentially functioning as provincial
governors in Iraq, or captains who find themselves in charge of a remote town
somewhere in Afghanistan. People who know how to do more than follow orders and
execute routines.

Look at the most successful, most acclaimed, and perhaps the finest soldier of
his generation, General David Petraeus. He’s one of those rare people who rises
through a bureaucracy for the right reasons. He is a thinker. He is an
intellectual. In fact, _Prospect_ magazine named him Public Intellectual of the
Year in 2008—that’s _in the world_. He has a Ph.D. from Princeton, but what
makes him a thinker is not that he has a Ph.D. or that he went to Princeton or
even that he taught at West Point. I can assure you from personal experience
that there are a lot of highly educated people who don’t know how to think at
all.

No, what makes him a thinker—and a leader—is precisely that he is able to think
things through for himself. And because he can, he has the confidence, the
_courage_, to argue for his ideas even when they aren’t popular. Even when they
don’t please his superiors. Courage: there is physical courage, which you all
possess in abundance, and then there is another kind of courage, moral courage,
the courage to stand up for what you believe.

It wasn’t always easy for him. His path to where he is now was not a straight
one. When he was running Mosul in 2003 as commander of the 101st Airborne and
developing the strategy he would later formulate in the _Counterinsurgency
Field Manual_ and then ultimately apply throughout Iraq, he pissed a lot of
people off. He was way ahead of the leadership in Baghdad and Washington, and
bureaucracies don’t like that sort of thing. Here he was, just another
two-star, and he was saying, implicitly but loudly, that the leadership was
wrong about the way it was running the war. Indeed, he was not rewarded at
first. He was put in charge of training the Iraqi army, which was considered a
blow to his career, a dead-end job. But he stuck to his guns, and ultimately he
was vindicated. Ironically, one of the central elements of his
counterinsurgency strategy is precisely the idea that officers need to think
flexibly, creatively, and independently.

That’s the first half of the lecture: the idea that true leadership means being
able to think for yourself and act on your convictions. But how do you learn to
do that? How do you learn to think? Let’s start with how you _don’t_ learn to
think. A study by a team of researchers at Stanford came out a couple of months
ago. The investigators wanted to figure out how today’s college students were
able to multitask so much more effectively than adults. How do they manage to
do it, the researchers asked? The answer, they discovered—and this is by no
means what they expected—is that they don’t. The enhanced cognitive abilities
the investigators expected to find, the mental faculties that enable people to
multitask effectively, were simply not there. In other words, people do not
multitask effectively. And here’s the really surprising finding: the more
people multitask, the worse they are, not just at other mental abilities, but
at multitasking itself.

One thing that made the study different from others is that the researchers
didn’t test people’s cognitive functions while they were multitasking. They
separated the subject group into high multitaskers and low multitaskers and
used a different set of tests to measure the kinds of cognitive abilities
involved in multitasking. They found that in every case the high multitaskers
scored worse. They were worse at distinguishing between relevant and irrelevant
information and ignoring the latter. In other words, they were more
distractible. They were worse at what you might call “mental filing”: keeping
information in the right conceptual boxes and being able to retrieve it
quickly. In other words, their minds were more disorganized. And they were even
worse at the very thing that defines multitasking itself: switching between
tasks.

Multitasking, in short, is not only not thinking, it impairs your ability to
think. _Thinking means concentrating on one thing long enough to develop an
idea about it._ Not learning other people’s ideas, or memorizing a body of
information, however much those may sometimes be useful. Developing your own
ideas. In short, thinking for yourself. You simply cannot do that in bursts of
20 seconds at a time, constantly interrupted by Facebook messages or Twitter
tweets, or fiddling with your iPod, or watching something on YouTube.

I find for myself that my first thought is never my best thought. My first
thought is always someone else’s; it’s always what I’ve already heard about the
subject, always the conventional wisdom. It’s only by concentrating, sticking
to the question, being patient, letting all the parts of my mind come into
play, that I arrive at an original idea. By giving my brain a chance to make
associations, draw connections, take me by surprise. And often even that idea
doesn’t turn out to be very good. I need time to think about it, too, to make
mistakes and recognize them, to make false starts and correct them, to outlast
my impulses, to defeat my desire to declare the job done and move on to the
next thing.

I used to have students who bragged to me about how fast they wrote their
papers. I would tell them that the great German novelist Thomas Mann said that
a writer is someone for whom writing is more difficult than it is for other
people. The best writers write much more slowly than everyone else, and the
better they are, the slower they write. James Joyce wrote _Ulysses_, the
greatest novel of the 20th century, at the rate of about a hundred words a
day—half the length of the selection I read you earlier from _Heart of
Darkness_—for seven years. T. S. Eliot, one of the greatest poets our country
has ever produced, wrote about 150 pages of poetry over the course of his
entire 25-year career. That’s half a page a month. So it is with any other form
of thought. You do your best thinking by slowing down and concentrating.

Now that’s the third time I’ve used that word, _concentrating_. Concentrating,
focusing. You can just as easily consider this lecture to be about
concentration as about solitude. Think about what the word means. It means
gathering yourself together into a single point rather than letting yourself be
dispersed everywhere into a cloud of electronic and social input. It seems to
me that Facebook and Twitter and YouTube—and just so you don’t think this is a
generational thing, TV and radio and magazines and even newspapers, too—are all
ultimately just an elaborate excuse to run away from yourself. To avoid the
difficult and troubling questions that being human throws in your way. Am I
doing the right thing with my life? Do I believe the things I was taught as a
child? What do the words I live by—words like _duty_, _honor_, and
_country_—really mean? Am I happy?

You and the members of the other service academies are in a unique position
among college students, especially today. Not only do you know that you’re
going to have a job when you graduate, you even know who your employer is going
to be. But what happens after you fulfill your commitment to the Army? Unless
you know who you are, how will you figure out what you want to do with the rest
of your life? Unless you’re able to listen to yourself, to that quiet voice
inside that tells you what you really care about, what you really believe
in—indeed, how those things might be evolving under the pressure of your
experiences. Students everywhere else agonize over these questions, and while
you may not be doing so now, you are only postponing them for a few years.

Maybe some of you _are_ agonizing over them now. Not everyone who starts here
decides to finish here. It’s no wonder and no cause for shame. You are being
put through the most demanding training anyone can ask of people your age, and
you are committing yourself to work of awesome responsibility and mortal
danger. The very rigor and regimentation to which you are quite properly
subject here naturally has a tendency to make you lose touch with the passion
that brought you here in the first place. I saw exactly the same kind of thing
at Yale. It’s not that my students were robots. Quite the reverse. They were
in­tensely idealistic, but the overwhelming weight of their practical
responsibilities, all of those hoops they had to jump through, often made them
lose sight of what those ideals were. Why they were doing it all in the first
place.

So it’s perfectly natural to have doubts, or questions, or even just
difficulties. The question is, what do you do with them? Do you suppress them,
do you distract yourself from them, do you pretend they don’t exist? Or do you
confront them directly, honestly, courageously? If you decide to do so, you
will find that the answers to these dilemmas are not to be found on Twitter or
Comedy Central or even in _The New York Times_. They can only be found
within—without distractions, without peer pressure, in solitude.

But let me be clear that solitude doesn’t always have to mean introspection.
Let’s go back to _Heart of Darkness_. It’s the solitude of concentration that
saves Marlow amidst the madness of the Central Station. When he gets there he
finds out that the steamboat he’s supposed to sail upriver has a giant hole in
it, and no one is going to help him fix it. “I let him run on,” he says, “this
papier-mâché Mephistopheles”—he’s talking not about the manager but his
assistant, who’s even worse, since he’s still trying to kiss his way up the
hierarchy, and who’s been raving away at him. You can think of him as the
Internet, the ever-present social buzz, chattering away at you 24/7:

> I let him run on, this papier-mâché Mephistopheles and it seemed to me that
> if I tried I could poke my forefinger through him, and would find nothing
> inside but a little loose dirt… .
> 
> It was a great comfort to turn from that chap to … the battered, twisted,
> ruined, tin-pot steamboat… . I had expended enough hard work on her to make
> me love her. No influential friend would have served me better. She had given
> me a chance to come out a bit—to find out what I could do. No, I don’t like
> work. I had rather laze about and think of all the fine things that can be
> done. I don’t like work—no man does—but I like what is in the work,—the
> chance to find yourself. Your own reality—for yourself, not for others—what
> no other man can ever know.

“The chance to find yourself.” Now that phrase, “finding yourself,” has
acquired a bad reputation. It suggests an aimless liberal-arts college
graduate—an English major, no doubt, someone who went to a place like Amherst
or Pomona—who’s too spoiled to get a job and spends his time staring off into
space. But here’s Marlow, a mariner, a ship’s captain. A more practical,
hardheaded person you could not find. And I should say that Marlow’s creator,
Conrad, spent 19 years as a merchant marine, eight of them as a ship’s captain,
before he became a writer, so this wasn’t just some artist’s idea of a sailor.
Marlow believes in the need to find yourself just as much as anyone does, and
the way to do it, he says, is work, solitary work. Concentration. Climbing on
that steamboat and spending a few uninterrupted hours hammering it into shape.
Or building a house, or cooking a meal, or even writing a college paper, if you
really put yourself into it.

“Your own reality—for yourself, not for others.” Thinking for yourself means
finding yourself, finding your own reality. Here’s the other problem with
Facebook and Twitter and even _The New York Times_. When you expose yourself to
those things, especially in the constant way that people do now—older people as
well as younger people—you are continuously bombarding yourself with a stream
of other people’s thoughts. You are marinating yourself in the conventional
wisdom. In other people’s reality: for others, not for yourself. You are
creating a cacophony in which it is impossible to hear your own voice, whether
it’s yourself you’re thinking about or anything else. That’s what Emerson meant
when he said that “he who should inspire and lead his race must be defended
from travelling with the souls of other men, from living, breathing, reading,
and writing in the daily, time-worn yoke of their opinions.” Notice that he
uses the word _lead_. Leadership means finding a new direction, not simply
putting yourself at the front of the herd that’s heading toward the cliff.

So why is reading books any better than reading tweets or wall posts? Well,
sometimes it isn’t. Sometimes, you need to put down your book, if only to think
about what you’re reading, what _you_ think about what you’re reading. But a
book has two advantages over a tweet. First, the person who wrote it thought
about it a lot more carefully. The book is the result of _his_ solitude, _his_
attempt to think for himself.

Second, most books are old. This is not a disadvantage: this is precisely what
makes them valuable. They stand against the conventional wisdom of today simply
because they’re not _from_ today. Even if they merely reflect the conventional
wisdom of their own day, they say something different from what you hear all
the time. But the great books, the ones you find on a syllabus, the ones people
have continued to read, don’t reflect the conventional wisdom of their day.
They say things that have the permanent power to disrupt our habits of thought.
They were revolutionary in their own time, and they are still revolutionary
today. And when I say “revolutionary,” I am deliberately evoking the American
Revolution, because it was a result of precisely this kind of independent
thinking. Without solitude—the solitude of Adams and Jefferson and Hamilton and
Madison and Thomas Paine—there would be no America.

So solitude can mean introspection, it can mean the concentration of focused
work, and it can mean sustained reading. All of these help you to know yourself
better. But there’s one more thing I’m going to include as a form of solitude,
and it will seem counterintuitive: friendship. Of course friendship is the
opposite of solitude; it means being with other people. But I’m talking about
one kind of friendship in particular, the deep friendship of intimate
conversation. Long, uninterrupted talk with one other person. Not Skyping with
three people and texting with two others at the same time while you hang out in
a friend’s room listening to music and studying. That’s what Emerson meant when
he said that “the soul environs itself with friends, that it may enter into a
grander self-acquaintance or solitude.”

Introspection means talking to yourself, and one of the best ways of talking to
yourself is by talking to another person. One other person you can trust, one
other person to whom you can unfold your soul. One other person you feel safe
enough with to allow you to acknowledge things—to acknowledge things to
yourself—that you otherwise can’t. Doubts you aren’t supposed to have,
questions you aren’t supposed to ask. Feelings or opinions that would get you
laughed at by the group or reprimanded by the authorities.

This is what we call thinking out loud, discovering what you believe in the
course of articulating it. But it takes just as much time and just as much
patience as solitude in the strict sense. And our new electronic world has
disrupted it just as violently. Instead of having one or two true friends that
we can sit and talk to for three hours at a time, we have 968 “friends” that we
never actually talk to; instead we just bounce one-line messages off them a
hundred times a day. This is not friendship, this is distraction.

I know that none of this is easy for you. Even if you threw away your cell
phones and unplugged your computers, the rigors of your training here keep you
too busy to make solitude, in any of these forms, anything less than very
difficult to find. But the highest reason you need to try is precisely because
of what the job you are training _for_ will demand of you.

You’ve probably heard about the hazing scandal at the U.S. naval base in
Bahrain that was all over the news recently. Terrible, abusive stuff that
involved an entire unit and was orchestrated, allegedly, by the head of the
unit, a senior noncommissioned officer. What are you going to do if you’re
confronted with a situation like that going on in _your_ unit? Will you have
the courage to do what’s right? Will you even know what the right thing is?
It’s easy to read a code of conduct, not so easy to put it into practice,
especially if you risk losing the loyalty of the people serving under you, or
the trust of your peer officers, or the approval of your superiors. What if
you’re not the commanding officer, but you see your superiors condoning
something you think is wrong?

How will you find the strength and wisdom to challenge an unwise order or
question a wrongheaded policy? What will you do the first time you have to
write a letter to the mother of a slain soldier? How will you find words of
comfort that are more than just empty formulas?

These are truly formidable dilemmas, more so than most other people will ever
have to face in their lives, let alone when they’re 23. The time to start
preparing yourself for them is now. And the way to do it is by thinking through
these issues for yourself—morality, mortality, honor—so you will have the
strength to deal with them when they arise. Waiting until you have to confront
them in practice would be like waiting for your first firefight to learn how to
shoot your weapon. Once the situation is upon you, it’s too late. You have to
be prepared in advance. You need to know, already, who you are and what you
believe: not what the Army believes, not what your peers believe (that may be
exactly the problem), but what _you_ believe.

How can you know that unless you’ve taken counsel with yourself in solitude? I
started by noting that solitude and leadership would seem to be contradictory
things. But it seems to me that solitude is the very essence of leadership. The
position of the leader is ultimately an intensely solitary, even intensely
lonely one. However many people you may consult, you are the one who has to
make the hard decisions. And at such moments, all you really have is yourself.
