# Dear Designer: How You Can Tell You’re Getting Better

[Medium][1], August 2019

## Being a better designer is about being a better person

This week’s question comes from Twitter, instead of a reader email. I began to
reply and then quickly realized it was better answered here, where we have the
room for a little more thought and nuance. And this question needs thought and
nuance, because it’s not as cut and dried as you’d think.

Obviously, you can tell you’re getting better as a designer when your craft is
a little more polished, when you start thinking more about systems rather
one-offs, when you start caring about how someone will move through a page more
than how the page looks, when it takes you an hour to do what used to take you
all day. These are some of the obvious signs you’re getting better as a
designer. You can tell the work of a first-year designer from the work of a
ten-year veteran. That’s the obvious stuff — the maturing-of-talent that comes
with getting more experience doing the thing you do. That shouldn’t be
discounted.

But to really get better as a designer, you have to get better as a person.
Because there’s a point at which the craft skills hit a wall that can only be
climbed by growing as a human being.

Let’s start with an admission: When I was in my twenties I thought I was a
fucking great designer. I thought I had the answers to everything. I thought I
could solve everything by myself; I thought I was a genius. The journey to
getting better as a designer was a journey toward understanding how much of an
idiot I actually am. Now that I’m in my fifties I understand how little I
actually know, how much better the people around me are at a lot of things, and
how much help I need from those around me. The journey toward getting better as
a designer means being okay with all of those things.

I used to have panic attacks thinking about a boss or a client possibly asking
me a question I didn’t have an answer for, or asking me to use a skillset I
didn’t have yet. Now, I get excited about the opportunity to either learn a new
skill or work with a colleague who already has it. Getting better as a designer
means valuing curiosity more than mastery and embracing what you don’t know
more than fearing it. Especially in an industry where things change every few
years.

Fall in love with what you don’t know. Because getting better as a designer
starts with understanding that you really don’t know much at all, and getting
really, really good at it means that the percentage of stuff you think you know
gets lower and lower as you grow.

I look forward to all of you realizing you’re as ignorant as I know I am. Or as
my boy Socrates once said, “All I know is that I know nothing.” This is also
known as the Socratic Paradox. (Ironically, we used to be sure that Socrates
said this, but we’re not so sure anymore, since Socrates never wrote anything
down and all we have are Plato’s meeting notes.)

So without further ado, let’s go into some of the lessons you’ll need to learn
to get better as a designer. And let me just say, I’ve had to learn all of
these the hard way. Some stuck more than others. Some I still struggle with.
Some I have to relearn every single time.

## Most of what you make is trash

Strap in — I’m about to use a sports metaphor. In 1941, Ted Williams of the
Boston Red Sox finished the season with a .406 batting average. He was the
first player in MLB to finish the season with a batting average over .400 since
1930, and no one has done it since. (In the interest of justice, let me just
say that every baseball statistic before racial integration deserves an
asterisk, but that’s another article — one someone else is better qualified to
write.) In short, in 1941, Ted Williams had the most successful offensive
season of the modern era. He hit .406. That means he succeeded in getting on
base 40% of the time. It also means he failed 60% of the time. For comparisons’
sake, a good batting average these days is considered to be .280, more or less.
That means that a professional baseball player can fail 72% of the time and
still be considered good.

Designers fail way more than that.

Most of what we do is trash. In over 20 years in this business, I don’t think
I’ve gotten better at making things; I’ve just gotten faster at realizing when
I was making trash. I can still recall entire days of laboring over one idea
trying to figure out how to make it work, or trying to “save” it, all in the
name of preserving my ego. I was terrified that I was making trash. But these
days, I just assume I’m making trash. And into the trash can it goes. Trash
work for the trash god! Every once in a while, I catch myself making something
that’s not trash, and I’m pleasantly surprised.

Just accept it: Most of what you make is trash.

## Listen more than you talk

The odds that you have the answer to everything are zero. The odds that you
have better answers than the people around you when you all put your heads
together are also zero. So listen to the people around you. And surround
yourself with people who are different from you; otherwise you’re just
listening to yourself, and that’s just another version of you talking. Listen
to the people you disagree with more than the ones you agree with; listen to
the ones who make you uncomfortable.

People have great stories, and if your mouth is moving you’ll never get to hear
them. “Tell me more about that” is the gateway to learning something you didn’t
know, and to gaining the respect of the people around you.

“Oh, but Mike! I know what they’re going to say next. I’ll get major points if
I say it before they do!” No, you won’t. You’ll look like an ass. And what if
you’re wrong? Never take away someone’s opportunity to surprise you.

# Get comfortable admitting you don’t know something

No matter how much you prepare, no matter how much you’ve researched, no matter
how smart you actually are, someone, at some point, is going to throw you a
question that you have no answer for. The most confident phrase that can come
out of your mouth at that point is “I don’t know.” Let’s look at the options:
You could lie, but that’s a jerk move. You could try to change the subject, but
c’mon, they’ll see through that. You could hem and haw and hope an answer falls
out of the sky, but deus ex machina isn’t an odds-friendly strategy.

Telling someone you don’t know something tells them you’re not willing to lie
to them, because if you’re going to lie to someone, that’s a prime place to do
it. And instead, you did the hard thing. You admitted you didn’t know. That
takes confidence! Also, it opened up an opportunity for learning. Because
they’re either going to tell you about what you don’t know, or tell you to go
find out.

I’ve worked with a bunch of designers over the years, managed more than a few
of them. I’ve explained things to them, I’ve gone over project briefs, I’ve
given them all feedback. Afterwards I’ve asked them if they had any questions.
If someone asks me to reexplain something I know they’re paying attention; if
they tell me it all made sense, I start worrying. Because for one thing, I’m
just not that thorough at explaining things — there’s no way I got everything
on the first pass. For another, most people aren’t good enough at understanding
things to get it all the first time around. Get comfortable asking for
clarification.

## Stop being afraid of getting fired

I’ve been fired more than once — fewer times than the number of digits I’m
typing with, but not by much. At the time, all of those firings seemed totally
unfair. In hindsight, I can’t believe I didn’t get fired sooner from a lot of
those jobs. I got fired for various reasons. Some of them because I was being a
jerk, some of them because I wasn’t doing good work, some of them because I
refused to do something that didn’t feel right, and some of them because I
should have never been working there to begin with.

Every time I got fired it felt bad. Every time I got fired I learned something.

Now, I don’t feel good about the places where I was being a jerk; in fact, I’ve
since apologized to those bosses. (Running your own company, and hiring your
own jerks, is a great way to develop empathy for your past bosses.) But I’ve
never regretted getting fired for standing my ground and refusing to do
something that felt sketchy. Jobs come and go, but trading a paycheck for
building something that tricks people, or lies to people, or takes advantage of
people is something that never goes away. Which brings us to our last point…

## Start caring more about people than pixels

When I was a baby designer I was really good at pushing pixels around. Getting
them into the right place. Making them all perfectly aligned. Making sure they
were all having a nice little elegant conversation on the screen. Making sure
they got along. I still enjoy doing it. It’s why I became a designer!

But to be a better designer, a good designer, you need to graduate from the
pixel. The pixel is the absolute smallest unit of measurement you can design.
Get bigger. To be a good designer you need to care about more than the
cleverness of your ideas: You need to care about how those ideas affect people.
You need to care about the people on the other side of the screen more than you
care about what you’re putting on the screen.

You need to care how your work affects their world. You have chosen a
profession that touches people’s lives. And that’s an amazing responsibility.
And ultimately, the way you can tell you’re getting better as a designer is
when you stop caring about the stuff you do, and start caring about the stuff
they do.

When someone gets to spend an extra hour with their kid or with their dog or
with their family, or sitting alone with a book, or at a show, or whatever,
because of something you did? That’s when you’re getting better as a designer.
