# A Short Lesson in Perspective

<a ref='author' href='http://www.lindsredding.com/2012/03/11/a-overdue-lesson-in-perspective/
'>Linds Redding</a>, 11 March 2012

Many years ago, when I first started to work in the advertising
industry, we used to have this thing called The Overnight Test. It
worked like this: My creative partner Laurence and I would spend the day
covering A2 sheets torn from layout pads with ideas for whatever project
we were currently engaged upon--an ad for a new gas oven, tennis racket
or whatever. Scribbled headlines. Bad puns. Stick-men drawings crudely
rendered in fat black Magic Marker. It was a kind of brain dump
I suppose. Everything that tumbled out of our heads and mouths was
committed to paper. Anything completely ridiculous, irrelevant or
otherwise unworkable was filtered out as we worked, and by beer o’clock
there would be an impressive avalanche of screwed-up paper filling the
corner of the room where our comically undersized waste-bin resided.

On a productive day, aside from the mountain of dead trees (recycling
hadn’t been invented in 1982), stacked polystyrene coffee cups and an
overflowing ash-tray, there would also be a satisfying thick sheaf of
“concepts.” Some almost fully formed and self-contained ideas. Others
misshapen and graceless fragments, but harbouring perhaps the glimmer of
a smile or a grain of human truth which had won it’s temporary reprieve
from the reject pile. Before trotting off to Clarks Bar to blow the
froth of a pint of Eighty-Bob, our last task was to pin everything up on
the walls of our office.

Hangovers not withstanding, the next morning at the crack of ten o’clock
we’d reconvene in our work-room and sit quietly surveying the fruits of
our labour. Usually about a third of the ‘ideas’ came down straight
away, before anyone else wandered past. It’s remarkable how something
that seems either arse-breakingly funny, or cosmically profound in the
white heat of it’s inception, can mean absolutely nothing in the cold
light of morning. By mid-morning coffee, the creative department was
coming back to life, and we participated in the daily ritual of
wandering around the airy Georgian splendour of our Edinburgh offices
and critiquing each teams crumpled creations. It wasn’t brutal or
destructive. Creative people are on the whole fragile beings, and
letting each other down gently and quietly was the unwritten rule.
Sometimes just a blank look or a scratched head was enough to see
a candidate quietly pulled down and consigned to the bin. Something
considered particularly “strong,” witty or clever would elicit cries of
“Hey, come and see what the boys have come up with!”&nbsp; Our compadres
would pile into our cramped room to offer praise or constructive
criticism. That was always a good feeling.

This human-powered bullshit filter was a handy and powerful tool.
Inexpensive, and practically foolproof. Not much slipped through the
net. I’m quite sure architects, musicians, mathematicians and cake
decorators all have an equivalent time-honed protocol.

But here’s the thing:

The Overnight Test only works if you can afford to wait overnight. To
sleep on it. Time moved on, and during the nineties technology overran
and transformed the creative industry like it did most others. Exciting
new tools. Endless new possibilities. Pressing new deadlines. With the
new digital tools at our disposal we could romp over the creative
landscape at full tilt. Have an idea, execute it and deliver it in
a matter of a few short hours. Or at least a long night. At first it was
a great luxury. We could cover so much more ground. Explore all the
angles. And having exhausted all the available possibilities, craft
a solution we could have complete faith in.


Or as the bean counters upstairs quickly realized, we could just do
three times as many jobs in the same amount of time, and make them three
times as much money. For the same reason that Jumbo Jets don’t have the
grand pianos and palm-court cocktail bars we were originally promised in
the brochures, the accountants naturally won the day.

Pretty soon, The Overnight Test became the Over Lunch Test. Then before
we knew it, we were eating Pot-Noodles at our desks, and taking it in
turns to go home and see our kids before they went to bed. As fast as we
could pin an idea on the wall, some red-faced account manager in a bad
suit would run away with it. Where we used to rely on taking a break and
"stretching the eyes" to allow us to see the wood from the trees (too
many idioms and similes? Probably). We now fell back on experience and
gut-feel. It worked most of the time, but nobody is infallible. Some
howlers and growlers definitely made it through, and generally standards
plummeted.

The other consequence, with the benefit of hindsight, is that we became
more conservative. Less likely to take creative risks and rely on the
tried and trusted. The familiar is always going to research better than
the truly novel. An research was the new god. The trick to being truly
creative, I’ve always maintained, is to be completely unselfconscious.
To resist the urge to self-censor. To not-give-a-shit what anybody
thinks. That’s why children are so good at it. And why people with
Volkswagens, and mortgages, Personal Equity Plans and matching Louis
Vuitton luggage are not.

It takes a certain amount of courage, thinking out loud. And is best
done in a safe and nurturing environment. Creative Departments and
design studios used to be such places, where you could say and do just
about anything creatively speaking, without fear of ridicule or
judgement. It has to be this way, or you will just close up like
a clamshell. It’s like trying to have sex, with your mum listening
outside the bedroom door. Can’t be done. Then some bright spark had the
idea of setting everyone up in competition. It became a contest. A race.
Winner gets to keep his job.


Now of course we are all suffering from the same affliction. Our
technology whizzes along at the velocity of a speeding electron, and our
poor overtaxed neurons struggle to keep up. Everything has become
a split-second decision. Find something you like. Share it. Have
a half-baked thought. Tweet it. Don’t wait. Don’t hesitate. Seize the
moment. Keep up. There will be plenty of time to repent later. Oh, and
just to cover your ass, don’t forget to stick a smiley :) on the end
just in case you’ve overstepped the mark.


So. To recap, The Overnight Test is a good thing. And sadly missed.
A weekend is even better, and as they fell by the wayside, they were
missed too. “If you don’t come in on Saturday, don’t bother turning up
on Sunday!” as the old advertising joke goes.

A week would be nice. A month would be an unreasonable luxury. I’ve now
‘enjoyed’ the better part of six months of enforced detachment from my
old reality. When your used to turning on a sixpence, shooting from the
hip, dancing on a pin-head (too many again?), the view back down from
six months is quite giddying. And sobering.


My old life looks, and feels, very different from the outside.


And here’s the thing.


It turns out I didn’t actually like my old life nearly as much as
I thought I did. I know this now because I occasionally catch up with my
old colleagues and work-mates. They fall over each other to
enthusiastically show me the latest project they’re working on. Ask my
opinion. Proudly show off their technical prowess (which is not
inconsiderable.) I find myself glazing over but politely listen as they
brag about who’s had the least sleep and the most takaway food. “I
haven’t seen my wife since January, I can’t feel my legs any more and
I think I have scurvy but another three weeks and we’ll be done. It’s
got to be done by then The client’s going on holiday. What do I think?”

What do I think?

I think you’re all fucking mad. Deranged. So disengaged from reality
it’s not even funny. It’s a fucking TV commercial. Nobody give a shit.

This has come as quite a shock I can tell you. I think, I’ve come to the
conclusion that the whole thing was a bit of a con. A scam. An elaborate
hoax.


The scam works like this:


1. The creative industry operates largely by holding ‘creative’ people
   ransom to their own self-image, precarious sense of self-worth, and
fragile – if occasionally out of control ego. We tend to set ourselves
impossibly high standards, and are invariably our own toughest critics.
Satisfying our own lofty demands is usually a lot harder than appeasing
any client, who in my experience tend to have disappointingly low
expectations. Most artists and designers I know would rather work all
night than turn in a sub-standard job. It is a universal truth that all
artists think they a frauds and charlatans, and live in constant fear of
being exposed. We believe by working harder than anyone else we can
evaded detection. The bean-counters rumbled this centuries ago and have
been profitably exploiting this weakness ever since. You don’t have to
drive creative folk like most workers. They drive themselves. Just wind
‘em up and let ‘em go.


2. Truly creative people tend not to be motivated by money. That’s why
   so few of us have any. The riches we crave are acknowledgment and
appreciation of the ideas that we have and the things that we make.
A simple but sincere “That’s quite good.” from someone who’s opinion we
respect (usually a fellow artisan) is worth infinitely more than any
pay-rise or bonus. Again, our industry masters cleverly exploit this
insecurity and vanity by offering glamorous but worthless trinkets and
elaborately staged award schemes to keep the artists focused and
motivated. Like so many demented magpies we flock around the shiny
things and would peck each others eyes out to have more than anyone
else. Handing out the odd gold statuette is a whole lot cheaper than
dishing out stock certificates or board seats.


3. The compulsion to create is unstoppable. It’s a need that has to be
   filled. I’ve barely ‘worked’ in any meaningful way for half a year,
but every day I find myself driven to ‘make’ something. Take
photographs. Draw. Write. Make bad music. It’s just an itch than needs
to be scratched. Apart from the occasional severed ear or descent into
fecal-eating dementia the creative impulse is mostly little more than
a quaint eccentricity. But introduce this mostly benign neurosis into
a commercial context.. well that way, my friends lies misery and
madness.


This hybridisation of the arts and business is nothing new of
course--it’s been going on for centuries – but they have always been
uncomfortable bed-fellows. But even artists have to eat, and the fuel of
commerce and industry is innovation and novelty. Hey! Let’s trade. “Will
work for food!” as the street-beggar's sign says.

This Faustian pact has been the undoing of many great artists, many more
journeymen and more than a few of my good friends. Add to this volatile
mixture the powerful accelerant of emerging digital technology and all
hell breaks loose. What I have witnessed happening in the last twenty
years is the aesthetic equivalent of the Industrial Revolution in the
19th century. The wholesale industrialization and mechanistation of the
creative process. Our ad agencies, design groups, film and music studios
have gone from being cottage industries and guilds of craftsmen and
women, essentially unchanged from the middle-ages, to dark sattanic
mills of mass production. Ideas themselves have become just another
disposable commodity to be supplied to order by the lowest bidder. As
soon as they figure out a way of outsourcing thinking to China they
won’t think twice. Believe me.


So where does that leave the artists and artisans? Well, up
a watercolour of shit creek without a painbrush. That one thing that we
prize and value above all else--the idea--turns out to be just another
plastic gizmo or widget to be touted and traded. And to add insult to
injury we now have to create them not in our own tine, but according to
the quota and the production schedule. “We need six concepts to show the
client first thing in the morning, he’s going on holiday. Don’t waste
too much time on them though, it’s only meeting-fodder. He’s only paying
for one so they don’t all have to be good, just knock something up. You
know the drill. Oh, and one more thing. His favourite color is green.
Right ho! See you in the morning then... I’m off to the Groucho Club.”


Have you ever tried to have an idea, any idea at all, with a gun to your
head? This is the daily reality for the creative drone. And when he’s
done, sometime in the wee small hours, he then has to face his two
harshest critics. Himself, and everyone else. “Ah. Sorry. Client
couldn’t make the meeting. I faxed your layouts to him at his squash
club. He quite liked the green one. Apart from the typeface, the words,
the picture and the idea. Oh, and could the logo be bigger? Hope it
wasn’t a late night. Thank god for computers, eh? Right ho! I’m off to
lunch.”


Alright, it’s not bomb disposal. But in it’s own way it’s dangerous and
demanding work. And as I’ve said, the rewards tend to be vanishingly
small. Plastic gold statuette anyone? I’ve seen quite a few creative
drones fall by the wayside over the years. Booze mostly. Drugs
occasionally. Anxiety. Stress. Broken marriages. Lots of those. Even
a couple of suicides. But mostly just people temperamentally and
emotionally ill-equipped for such a hostile and toxic environment.
Curiously, there never seems to be any shortage of eager young worker
drones queuing up to try their luck, although I detect that even their
bright-eyed enthusiasm is staring to wane. Advertising was the sexy
place to be in the eighties. The zeitgeist has move on. And so have most
of the bright-young-things.

So how did I survive for thirty years? Well it was a close shave. Very
close. And while on the inside I am indeed a ‘delicate flower’ as some
Creative Director once wryly observed, I have enjoyed until recently,
the outward physical constitution and rude heath of an ox. I mostly hid
my insecurity and fear from everyone but those closest to me, and ran
fast enough that I would never be found out. The other thing I did,
I now discover, was to convince myself that there was nothing else,
absolutely nothing, I would rather be doing. That I had found my true
calling in life, and that I was unbelievably lucky to be getting paid
– most of the time – for something that I was passionate about, and
would probably be doing in some form or other anyway.

It turns out that my training and experience had equipped me perfectly
for this epic act of self-deceit. This was my gig. My schtick.
Constructing a compelling and convincing argument to buy, from the
thinnest of evidence was what we did. “Don’t sell the sausage. Sell the
sizzle” as we were taught at ad school.

Countless late nights and weekends, holidays, birthdays, school recitals
and anniversary dinners were willingly sacrificed at the altar of some
intangible but infinitely worthy higher cause. It would all be worth it
in the long run…

This was the con. Convincing myself that there was nowhere I’d rather be
was just a coping mechanism. I can see that now. It wasn't really
important. Or of any consequence at all really. How could it be. We were
just shifting product. Our product, and the clients. Just meeting the
quota. Feeding the beast as I called it on my more cynical days.

So was it worth it?

Well, of course not. It turns out it was just advertising. There was no
higher calling. No ultimate prize. Just a lot of faded, yellowing
newsprint, and old video cassettes in an obsolete format I can’t even
play any more even if I was interested. Oh yes, and a lot of framed
certificates and little gold statuettes. A shit-load of empty Prozac
boxes, wine bottles, a lot of grey hair and a tumor of indeterminate
dimensions.

It sounds like I’m feeling sorry for myself again. I’m not. It was fun
for quite a lot of the time. I was pretty good at it. I met a lot of
funny, talented and clever people, got to become an overnight expert in
everything from shower-heads to sheep-dip, got to scratch my creative
itch on a daily basis, and earned enough money to raise the family which
I love, and even see them occasionally.

But what I didn’t do, with the benefit of perspective, is anything of
any lasting importance. At least creatively speaking. Economically
I probably helped shift some merchandise. Enhanced a few companies
bottom lines. Helped make one or two wealthy men a bit wealthier than
they already were.

As a life, it all seemed like such a good idea at the time.

But I’m not really sure it passes The Overnight Test.

Pity.

Oh. And if you're reading this while sitting in some darkened studio or
edit suite agonizing over whether housewife A should pick up the soap
powder with her left hand or her right, do yourself a favour. Power
down. Lock up and go home and kiss your wife and kids.
